# Assembly and Linking Basics
## Related file types and concepts  
- machine instruction  
- assembly source code file  
- relocatable file
- executable file

## Assembly and linking workflow  
- The CPU can only decode and execute _machine instructions_.  
- An _assembly source code file_ consists of assembly instructions, which are symbolic representations of machine instructions.  
- The assembler can translate an _assembly source file_ into a _relocatable file_.  
- A relocatable file contains machine instructions and some meta information.  
- A relocatable file can't be loaded and executed directly, because it may reference some symbols whose address values are not known yet.  
- Multiple _relocatable flles_ can be linked to resolve unknown symbols and form an _executable file_.  
- An executable file contains machine instructions to be executed, and its meta information specifies the memory address where the program should be loaded.

## Why does a symbol with an unknown address value exist?  

In this section, we learn how an assembly source file is converted into an executable file step by step, and why does a symbol with an unknown address value exist?  

### Example assembly source file
Take the following assembly source code file `test.s` as an example.  
```asm
.text

/* load a immediate value to t0 */
lui t0, %hi(0x12345678)        /* higher 20 bits */
addi t0, t0, %lo(0x12345678)   /* lower 12 bits  */

/* load a symbol value to t0 */
lui t0, %hi(hello_string)
addi t0, t0, %lo(hello_string)

/* define a string */
hello_string:
.string "Hello, RISC-V!"

```

The source file performs three operations:  
1. Load an `immediate number` into the t0 register with two instructions `lui` and `addi`
2. Load a symbolic `hello_string` into the t1 register with two instructions `lui` and `addi`
3. Define a string with the symbol `hello_string`

## Assembly

In short, assembly is the process of reading assembly instructions from assembly source file one by one and translating them into machine instructions.  

### Example Analysis  
What should the result look like after assembly? Let's analyse it.  

- The third operation is just a string definition, the assembler just needs to convert it to ASCII.  
- For the first operation, whose operand is an immediate number, the assembler can generate the corresponding machine instruction exactly.    

However, the second statement contains a symbol `hello_string`. The value of the symbol actually represents a memory address where the data or instructions following the symbol in assembly source code should be loaded upon execution.  

**The problem** is that when assembling, the assembler doesn't know where the data or instructions which followed a symbol should be loaded upon execution,  thus don't know the symbol value.  

In addition to the local symbols, an assembly file can also reference symbols in other assembly files. These symbols obviously cannot be resolved when assembling an assembly source file.  

### Unresolved symbols  

At assembly time, some symbols are not immediately resolved. When the assembler meets a assembly instruction with a unresolved symbol, it treats the symbol value as `zero`, then translates the assembly instruction to a machine instruction. Obviously, the data bits representing the unresolved symbol are also `zero` in the translated machine instructions.  

To ensure that the unresolved symbols are finally resolved correctly, the assembler places additional auxiliary information in the generated target file. These auxiliary information are used to assist in _symbol resolution_ or _symbol relocation_, so the target files generated by the assembler are called **relocatable files**.  

### Assemble example file and explore its content

We can assemble the example file to a relocatable file with `riscv64-linux-gnu-as` .  

```bash
riscv64-linux-gnu-as test.s -o test.o
```

The above command assembles `test.s` and generates the relocatable file `test.o` .  

Let's explore `test.o` !

With command `riscv64-linux-gnu-objdump -S test.o` , we can disassemble `test.o` .  
```
$ riscv64-linux-gnu-objdump -S test.o

test.o:     file format elf64-littleriscv


Disassembly of section .text:

0000000000000000 <hello_string-0x10>:
   0:   123452b7                lui     t0,0x12345
   4:   67828293                addi    t0,t0,1656 # 12345678 <hello_string+0x12345668>
   8:   000002b7                lui     t0,0x0
   c:   00028293                mv      t0,t0

0000000000000010 <hello_string>: (Omitted, because here is just some ASCII data)
```

As we can see, the first operation that operates immediate number `0x12345678` has been translated as follows. The operand `0x12345678` is splited into higher 20 bits `0x12345` and lower 12 bits `0x678`, spreaded in `123452b7 : lui t0,0x12345` and `67828293 : addi  t0, t0, 0x678` respectively.  
```
   0:   123452b7                lui     t0,0x12345
   4:   67828293                addi    t0,t0,1656 # 12345678 <hello_string+0x12345668>
```

However, the second operation that operates symbol `hello_string`, as we analyse before, the operand is replaced with `0x0`.  
```
   8:   000002b7                lui     t0,0x0
   c:   00028293                mv      t0,t0
``` 
Specifically, compared to the first operation:   
- `0x123452b7` -> `0x000002b7` OR `lui t0,0x12345` -> `lui t0,0x00000`  
- `0x67828293` -> `0x00028293` OR `addi t0,t0,0x678` -> `addi t0,t0,0x000` (the same as `mv t0,t0`)  

Where is the relocation infomation? Just execute `riscv64-linux-gnu-objdump -r test.o` .  
```
$ riscv64-linux-gnu-objdump -r test.o

test.o:     file format elf64-littleriscv

RELOCATION RECORDS FOR [.text]:
OFFSET           TYPE              VALUE 
0000000000000008 R_RISCV_HI20      hello_string
0000000000000008 R_RISCV_RELAX     *ABS*
000000000000000c R_RISCV_LO12_I    hello_string
000000000000000c R_RISCV_RELAX     *ABS*
```

`0000000000000008 R_RISCV_HI20      hello_string` means that the operand of the machine instruction at offset `0x8` of the relocatable file test.o needs to be replaced by higher 20-bits of the symbol `hello_string` value when linking.  

`000000000000000c R_RISCV_LO12_I    hello_string` means that the operand of the machine instruction at offset `0xc` of the relocatable file test.o needs to be replaced by lower 12-bits of the symbol `hello_string` value when linking.  

## Linking

The linker accepts multiple relocatable files, reads the data and machine instructions from each relocatable file and arranges all needed data and instructions in the final executable file according to specific rules.   

The linker needs to know where to load the executable's data and machine instructions at the time of execution，so that it can infer the address values of all symbols.  

Then, according to relocation entries of each relocation file, the linker modifies those machine instructions associated with symbols that were previously unresolved during assembling but are now resolved.   

### Link and explore the executable file

Firstly, we need prepare a linking script [test.ld](test.ld).  
_test.ld_ contains just a line: `. = 0x0;` . It tells the linker that the program load address is 0x0 .
```
. = 0x0;
```

Link `test.o` with the comand `riscv64-linux-gnu-ld -T test.ld test.o -o test`, then we can get a executable file `test`. Just like before, disassemble `test` with the command `riscv64-linux-gnu-objdump -S test`  

The instructions of `test` is as follows:  
```
$ riscv64-linux-gnu-objdump -S test

test:     file format elf64-littleriscv


Disassembly of section .text:

0000000000000000 <hello_string-0xc>:
   0:   123452b7                lui     t0,0x12345
   4:   67828293                addi    t0,t0,1656 # 12345678 <hello_string+0x1234566c>
   8:   00c00293                li      t0,12

000000000000000c <hello_string>:
        ...
```

Compare 

```
   8:   00c00293                li      t0,12
```

with before:

```
   8:   000002b7                lui     t0,0x0
   c:   00028293                mv      t0,t0
```

We can see that the machine instruction at `0x8` has been replaced with `00c00293 : li t0,12` (the same as `00c00293 : addi t0, t0, 0xc`).  

The completion version should be:  
```
   8:   000002b7                lui     t0,0x0
   c:   00c00293                addi    t0, t0, 0xc
```
Maybe the linker knons that `000002b7 : lui t0,0x0` is redundant, so it removed this.  

**The point is that: the symbol `hello_string` is resolved and the associated machine instructions is fixed!**  

With command `riscv64-linux-gnu-objdump -t test`, we can print the symbols table, and we can see that the value of symbol `hello_string` is `0xc` now.  

```
$ riscv64-linux-gnu-objdump -t test

test:     file format elf64-littleriscv

SYMBOL TABLE:
0000000000000000 l    d  .text  0000000000000000 .text
0000000000000000 l    df *ABS*  0000000000000000 test.o
000000000000000c l       .text  0000000000000000 hello_string
```

## What happens if we change the load address?

If change the load address to `0x10000000`, the disassembly file is: 
```
$ riscv64-linux-gnu-objdump -S test

test:     file format elf64-littleriscv


Disassembly of section .text:

0000000010000000 <hello_string-0x10>:
    10000000:   123452b7                lui     t0,0x12345
    10000004:   67828293                addi    t0,t0,1656 # 12345678 <hello_string+0x2345668>
    10000008:   100002b7                lui     t0,0x10000
    1000000c:   01028293                addi    t0,t0,16 # 10000010 <hello_string>

0000000010000010 <hello_string>:
```

And the symbols table is: 
```
$ riscv64-linux-gnu-objdump -t test

test:     file format elf64-littleriscv

SYMBOL TABLE:
0000000010000000 l    d  .text  0000000000000000 .text
0000000000000000 l    df *ABS*  0000000000000000 test.o
0000000010000010 l       .text  0000000000000000 hello_string
```

We can see that the the value of symbol `hello_string` has been modified accordingly.  

## References
- [Executable and Linkable Format (ELF)](http://www.skyfree.org/linux/references/ELF_Format.pdf)
